------------------------ Submission 263, Review 1 ------------------------

Title: A Taxonomy of Visualization Tasks and Requirements for the Effective Analysis of Biological Pathways

Reviewer:           primary

Overall Rating

   2.5

Topic Classification

   Type: Theory and model
   Topic: Visual representation and interaction technique

Best Paper Award

   No

Contribution to the field of Visual Analytics

   Understanding the tasks and techniques which support those tasks, is an
   important endeavour in visualisation research, and this paper provides an
   analysis specific to biological pathways data.
   A minor contribution is made in this paper:
    A list of commonly encountered tasks relevant to biological pathway
   analysis, based on interviews with seven biological scientists from
   which, a set of requirements for effective pathway analysis are extracted
   A review of visual representations to fulfil the requirements are
   identified, including those which are not yet implemented in existing
   tools, but which could potentially be of use however this is surface
   analysis and justification. This is followed by a review and evaluation
   of existing tools in terms of their support for the identified
   requirements which doesn't tie the previous sections together well. The
   conclusions of further work does not give any real insights.


Expertise

   4  (Expert)

The Review

   3. Tasks:
   The list of tasks was generated through a series of interviews with
   expert users.  No information is given as to whether or how the resulting
   list of tasks was evaluated e.g. are all tasks relevant to the different
   types of data that the experts work with? Was the final list presented to
   the experts at the end of the interviews (or an additional expert) to be
   sure that nothing had been missed? This is important as the rest of the
   paper is based on the premise that these are the tasks involved in
   pathway analysis; some mention of how we can be confident that this is
   the case would be reassuring.
   The structure of the discussion of tasks in this section needs to be
   addressed. At present, each task appears at the end of the discussion
   relating to it; from a reader’s perspective these look like headings,
   which made this section very (and unnecessarily) confusing to read!
   Please could this be re-ordered so that the tasks are indeed used as
   headings?
   Task T4: “examine high-level relationships between modules and
   pathways” -  what are modules? (*maybe this will be apparent to
   bio-readers*)
   Task T7: the use of “analyse” in “analyse high-throughput omics
   data” is a very vaguely specified task – could do with more info as
   to what this type of analysis might involve

   4. Requirements
   I think I would have been more convinced by this section if the
   discussion had been structured around support for tasks, from which the
   list of requirements were extracted. As it stands, a list of requirements
   are presented and then discussed with reference made to the tasks which
   they might help support. A table showing which requirements map to which
   tasks would be useful to illustrate how they relate to one another, as
   this is currently spread throughout the text.  Also, Tasks 9 and 10 are
   not explicitly referred to during this discussion – which requirements
   address these tasks? Similarly, the discussions of R1, R2, and R3, do not
   mention to which tasks they are related (perhaps they are applicable to
   all tasks?)
   Also, it could be clearer exactly what kind of requirements these are:
   some of them refer to visual representation/layouts (e.g. R7 Display
   hierarchical structures) others to interaction techniques (e.g. R3
   search, filter, and select), while others refer to analysis which might
   be carried out (e.g. R6 Simulation), and still others refer to
   analytics/data support (e.g. R14 Incorporate online databases, R15
   High-throughput data processing).
   5. Visual encodings and representations:
   It is not entirely clear to me how this section fits with the rest of the
   work.  The discussion of hierarchical techniques could make further
   reference to work in this area e.g. other types of implicit hierarchy,
   such as those discussed by Schulz et al. (2011) and also Müller et al.'s
   (2013) user evaluation.
   6 Tools and 7 Future work
   The review of tools with regard to which requirements they currently
   implement is illustrated in Table 4 which clearly indicates a lack of
   support for R6, R12, R13, and R15, but the discussion in the future work
   section does not directly refer to this. I think these two sections could
   be better tied together. For example, 7.2 discusses web based data
   integration as important (R14), but Table 4 indicates that 4 of the 7
   systems reviewed already support this.  Also none of the systems support
   R13 (pathway curation, creation, and notation), but this doesn’t seem
   to be considered as future work? It would be much improved if the
   requirements that had not been addressed had been discussed further and
   potential solutions proposed.


   1. Intro:
   Figure 1 is too small to read (if space is an issue, I would suggest
   reducing the size of Table 1)
   There is useful background work done here but the paper require more of a
   contribution to be worthy of publication.

   there are several typos.

Main Recommendation

   <b>Unacceptable for presentation</b>

Additional Recommendation about TVCG Publication



The Summary Review

   Undertaking task analysis of domain specific problems such as biological
   pathway analysis is an important task, however the work presented in the
   paper has many weaknesses.
   Firstly the paper does not present a taxonomy but rather a list of tasks
   and the list of tasks is not fully covered in the requirement analysis.
   The following review of visualisation techniques does not tie in well
   enough with the tasks and requirements to be of much benefit - it is too
   general. The review of existing tools again does not tie back to the
   tasks and only on table 4 for the requirements. Finally the conclusions
   do not discuss potential approaches to deal with the gaps n existing
   tools. The paper is missing several important references and has several
   grammatical errors.
   It is unlikely that all of these issues could be addressed within the
   timescale.

Second round final review



Best Paper Award



Second round comments



------------------------ Submission 263, Review 2 ------------------------

Title: A Taxonomy of Visualization Tasks and Requirements for the Effective Analysis of Biological Pathways

Reviewer:           external

Overall Rating

   <b>4</b>: Good contribution

Topic Classification

   Type: Others
   Topic: Others

Best Paper Award

   No

Contribution to the field of Visual Analytics

   There are significant opportunities for visual analytics to really make
   an impact in this field, although until this point that contribution has
   been fairly minimal.
   I believe this paper can incentivise visualization experts to work on
   this problem more, and have a solid starting point in terms of
   requirements.
   This is why I believe it can make a considerable contribution to the
   visualization community.

Expertise

   3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review

   Biological pathway visualization is a big problem, and there have been
   relatively few papers by the visualization community so far around this
   problem.
   While this paper does not off technological advancements to the state of
   play, it could still play an important role in how tools are developed in
   the future to address the requirements of such tools.
   Having a reference paper for visualization experts to access that has
   already collected the tasks and requirements of some users (at different
   seniorities).

   I believe this paper can incentivise visualization experts to work on
   this problem more, and have a solid starting point in terms of
   requirements.
   This is why I believe it can make a considerable contribution to the
   visualization community.

   It would have been great to hear more objective feedback about existing
   tools too and where they are going wrong.

   * Minor corrections

   1) Put table 1 before table 2 in the final document.

   2) Tasks 8 and 9 seem to be pretty much the same. Also the descriptions
   don't really appear to match.

   3) Section 5, first paragraph, you say 'three' groups - there are four.

   4) Add reference to pathprint for Graph visualization approaches, but as
   an example of an abstract layout.

        Pathline: A Tool For Comparative Functional Genomics. Miriah Meyer, Bang
   Wong, Mark Styczynski, Tamara Munzner, and Hanspeter Pfister. Computer
   Graphics Forum (Proc. EuroVis 2010), 29(3):1043-1052.

        Maybe add enRoute too -
   http://people.seas.harvard.edu/~alex/papers/2012_biovis_enroute.pdf as it
   complements entourage.

   5) Add some references to set visualization, e.g. OnSet
   (http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~john.stasko/papers/infovis14-onset.pdf) (I
   believe this could be used to represent interactions between items in
   sets for instance, although not mentioned explicitly in the paper), and
   Upset
   (http://people.seas.harvard.edu/~alex/papers/2014_infovis_upset.pdf) -
   see this example where upset is used to visualize protein complex
   interactions
   http://vcg.github.io/upset/?dataset=3&duration=1000&orderBy=subsetSize&grouping=groupByIntersectionSize&selection=.

        Also a reference to more general Set visualization survey paper:

        Visualizing Sets and Set-typed Data: State-of-the-Art and Future
   Challenges. Bilal Alsallakh and Luana Micallef and Aigner, Wolfgang and
   Hauser, Helwig and Miksch, S. and Peter Rodgers, Eurographics conference
   on Visualization (EuroVis) - State of The Art Reports, 2014

   6) Add Pathlines, OnSet, and enRoute to list.

   * Spelling/grammar mistakes

    - Section 3
        'that that' > 'that'
        'such as [23])approach' > add a space

   - Section 4
        'Any pathway data' > 'Pathway data'
        'can be represented in the abstract' > 'can be represented abstractly'
        'involves that analysis' > 'involves the analysis'
        'gene producs' > 'gene products'

   - Section 5
        'that mat' > 'that may'
        'subdivided in multiple' > 'subdivided in to multiple'
        'in an attempt to more efficient use of a two-dimensional space' > 'in
   an attempt to make more efficient use of two-dimensional space'
        'to to' >  'to'

   - Section 7
        'compresensive' > 'comprehensive'


------------------------ Submission 263, Review 3 ------------------------

Title: A Taxonomy of Visualization Tasks and Requirements for the Effective Analysis of Biological Pathways

Reviewer:           secondary

Overall Rating

   <b>2</b>: Weak contribution

Topic Classification

   Type: Theory and model
   Topic: Data handling and knowledge representation

Best Paper Award

   No

Contribution to the field of Visual Analytics

   The paper aims at providing a taxonomy for the classification of tasks
   commonly performed by scientists concerned with the analysis of
   biological data. The authors focus on the topic of biological processes
   and consequently on the problem of analysing complex pathways. The topic
   is an important one and of interest to any visualisation field concerned
   with analysis of scientific data.

Expertise

   4  (Expert)

The Review

   - What are its strengths and weaknesses?
   Strengths:
   The paper topic is very interesting and the author produce a summary of
   the most important tasks performed by scientist in analysing biological
   pathways. They also provide a list of requirement to satisfy each task.
   Table 4 also provide a nice classification of tools used for pathway
   visualisation with respect to the list of requirements.

   Weaknesses:
   The authors do not present either a taxonomy of tasks or requirements but
   just lists.
   The correlation between the list of requirements is incomplete, the
   requirements listed in Section 4 seem only  to address Tasks:
   2,3,4,5,6,7,8,11,12,13. Tasks 1, 9 and 10 are not correlated to any of
   the requirements.

   Section 5 discusses standard state of the art techniques for the
   visualization of connected/correlated data layouts of data. While visual
   layout are an important aspects, since the paper moves on to describe
   visualisation tools then the authors should have also provided a
   discussion of aspects such as: interaction, data browsing and annotation.
   Which are core components in the analysis of any scientific dataset.
   Aspects that are also core features of the visualisation tools discussed
   in Section 6 (e.g. isolated vs. multiple pathway views etc.)


   Section 5.4 does not provide any example/reference of Matrix based
   techniques.

   Sections 5.1 and 5.4 do not seem to correlate to any of the requirements
   listed in Section 4.
   Section 5.2 and 5.3 answer to requirements 7 and 8 respectively. If none
   of the visualisation described respond to any of the requirements why are
   they mentioned? I do believe some of the visualisation techniques do
   indeed fit some requirements however the authors do not provide any
   discussion/reflection in this respect.

   There is an overall lack of structure and rather just a presentation of
   material, which is relevant to the focus of the paper but not complete.
   A taxonomy is supposed to provide a sound categorization of the topic it
   refers to, in the present work  such categorisation is hinted but not
   clearly presented.

   The paper seems to be written in a rush, Figures and tables lack quality
   (Figure are  not readable, Tables use different styles), Section 3 "can
   be found in Table" missing table number.

   Finally, and most importantly, I am quite familiar with the work by
   Saraya et al [citation n. 32] where a very sound categorization is
   presented on the same topic. The authors list of requirements overlap
   extensively with the one provided by Saraya et al. the authors do not
   provide a proper comparison of their approach with this previous work.
   I could not see a real novelty of what proposed with respect to this
   previous besides the discussion of visualisation tools presented in
   Section 6.

   - Will this work inspire others in VAST research? Will it inform VAST
   practitioners?
   The work is interesting and builds upon a very interesting contribution
   from Saraya, North, Duca [32].
   It has some additions with respect to this previous work which
   unfortunately are not pursued in enough detail.

   - Is the work important or useful? Does it synthesize otherwise disparate
   ideas?
   I can see good ideas but not a well structured synthesis.

   - Is this work novel, incremental, or previously published?
   The paper builds heavily on previous work, the authors do not make a
   compelling case in terms of novelty with respect to it.

   - Is related work adequately referenced and if not what citations should
   be added?
   Miriah Meyer, Tamara Munzner, and Hanspeter Pfister. 2009. MizBee: A
   Multiscale Synteny Browser. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
   Computer Graphics 15, 6 (November 2009), 897-904.
   DOI=10.1109/TVCG.2009.167 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2009.167

   - Are the technical results sound? Are the methods and techniques
   described in adequate detail?
   Results are incomplete, proposed categorization is not yet sound enough.

   - Is the exposition clear? How could the structure or style of the
   presentation be improved?
   As previously mentioned the paper seems to be written in a rush, Figures
   and tables lack quality (Figure are  not readable, Tables use different
   styles), Section 3 "can be found in Table" missing table number.

   - Are the figures informative?
   Figures need majour revision. Figure 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 all need to be high
   resolution, they are not readable.
   Author should make sure of correct ordering: Figure 5 should come after
   Figure 4.



------------------------ Submission 263, Review 4 ------------------------

Title: A Taxonomy of Visualization Tasks and Requirements for the Effective Analysis of Biological Pathways

Reviewer:           external

Overall Rating

   <b>2</b>: Weak contribution

Topic Classification

   Type: Theory and model
   Topic: Visual representation and interaction technique

Best Paper Award

   No

Contribution to the field of Visual Analytics

   This paper introduces a task taxonomy for pathway analysis based on
   interviews with multiple domain experts. It continuous with a review of
   general graph visualization technique and a review and analysis of
   pathway visualization techniques. While the paper is interesting, the
   task and requirement analysis could be refined, the selected related work
   seems sometimes out of place and the future work is not very visionary.
   This is not a clear visual analytics paper, it could equally go to
   InfoVis or BioVis, but I don't think that's a bad thing.

Expertise

   4  (Expert)

The Review

   While the tasks and requirements are interesting and informative, they
   seem a little ad-hoc. First, the paper should discuss related biological
   network problem analysis, e.g., [1, 2], and should relate the described
   tasks to general visualization task taxonomies, e.g., [3, 4]. The tasks
   and requirements themselves are largely good, but some are a little
   questionable. Task 5 is very related to Task 1, albeit they are on a
   different level of granularity. What is the difference between task 7 and
   task 11? It seems like 11 is a slightly generalized version of 7.
   Requirements 9 and 11 are not really requirements but solutions.
   Requirement 14 doesn't map to a task. Requirement 15 seems a little out
   of focus.

   Maybe a hierarchy of tasks might make sense. A top-level classification
   could be, e.g., topology-based tasks, attribute based tasks and edit
   tasks.


   Section 5 seems rather out-of place in this paper. The node-link section,
   for example, discusses a couple of techniques but is in no way
   comprehensive (which it shouldn't be). On the other hand, some techniques
   are discussed that are rarely used for pathway visualization (circular
   layouts, fish-eyes, edge bundling, etc.). It might make sense to point to
   a review (e.g., [5]) and discuss only pathway-specific examples here
   (e.g., [6, 7]). Section 5.2 and 5.3 have a similar problem: general set
   visualization / hierarchical techniques are discussed, but their
   relevance for biological data is unclear. These techniques are sometimes
   used in pathway visualization, but it might make sense to introduce them
   when discussing such a technique.

   Section 6, in contrast, is very brief and should be significantly
   extended. The basic visualization techniques are probably better
   introduced where necessary in this section.

   The future work seems not very domain-specific. Including
   edge-bundingling and fish eye lenses, for example, is not something that
   a pathway task taxonomy paper should recommend. Section 7.3 is very
   generic.

   The paper does not discuss applications of algorithmic approaches, yet
   there are several obviously relevant topics: pathway over-representation
   analysis, for example, should be discussed. An approach to dealing with
   large networks is aggregation or smart sampling.

   Overall I do think that the paper has some merit, but I don't think it's
   quite ready for publication yet.



   Other Comments
   --------------

   KEGG is not a data format, but the KEGG organization defines a data
   format - KGML.

   I found it very irritating that the tasks - in bold - are shown at the
   end of the paragraph that discusses them. The bold tasks look like
   section headers and should probably be used this way.

   The paper states that automatic tools for node-link layouts mimic the
   style of hand-drawn pathways. This is true for some, but certainly not
   for all approaches. It's, for example, not true for the first case given
   - force directed layouts.

   Section 5.1 should be called Node-Link visualizations, as e.g., matrices
   are also graph visualizations.


   The experimental data analysis capabilities of Entourage are introduced
   in detail as the enRoute view in a separate publication [8]. This paper
   also contains a requirement analysis for pathways. enRoute/Entourage do
   both, visualizing experimental data in a separate view and visualizing
   aggregate information directly on the nodes.

   Table 4 should list the requirements - it's hard to go back 5 pages to
   see which requirements is actually referred to. To do this, the table
   should probably be transposed.


   Spelling/Grammar
   ---------------

   in given diagram -> in a given diagram
   First paragraph in 1.1 contains the word structure three times.
   which different -> with different
   that that -> that
   a wide variety of relationship type -> types
   are may be -> either are or may be
   "the hand-made approach to pathway diagram creation has been replicated
   digitally in public databases" -> I would suggest something like "is used
   in many public databases", as replicated digitally implies that they were
   hand drawn before, but human generated doesn't mean that they are not
   digital.


   [1] M. Albrecht, A. Kerren, K. Klein, O. Kohlbacher, P. Mutzel, W. Paul,
   F. Schreiber, and M. Wybrow, “On Open Problems in Biological Network
   Visualization,” in Graph Drawing, vol. 5849, D. Eppstein and E.
   Gansner, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 256–267.

   [2] O. Kohlbacher, F. Schreiber, and M. O. Ward, “Multivariate Networks
   in the Life Sciences,” in Multivariate Network Visualization, A.
   Kerren, H. C. Purchase, and M. O. Ward, Eds. Springer International
   Publishing, 2014, pp. 61–73.

   [3] M. Brehmer and T. Munzner, “A Multi-Level Typology of Abstract
   Visualization Tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
   Graphics, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2376–2385, 2013.

   [4] H.-J. Schulz, T. Nocke, M. Heitzler, and H. Schumann, “A Design
   Space of Visualization Tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
   Computer Graphics, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2366–2375, 2013.

   [5] T. von Landesberger, A. Kuijper, T. Schreck, J. Kohlhammer, J. J. van
   Wijk, J.-D. Fekete, and D. W. Fellner, “Visual Analysis of Large
   Graphs: State-of-the-Art and Future Research Challenges,” Computer
   Graphics Forum, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 1719–1749, 2011.

   [6] A. Barsky, T. Munzner, J. Gardy, and R. Kincaid, “Cerebral:
   Visualizing Multiple Experimental Conditions on a Graph with Biological
   Context,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
   (InfoVis ’08), vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1253–1260, 2008.

   [7] M. Rohrschneider, C. Heine, A. Reichenbach, A. Kerren, and G.
   Scheuermann, “A Novel Grid-Based Visualization Approach for Metabolic
   Networks with Advanced Focus&Context View,” in Graph Drawing, vol.
   5849, D. Eppstein and E. Gansner, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010,
   pp. 268–279.

   [8] C. Partl, A. Lex, M. Streit, D. Kalkofen, K. Kashofer, and D.
   Schmalstieg, “enRoute: Dynamic Path Extraction from Biological Pathway
   Maps for Exploring Heterogeneous Experimental Datasets,” BMC
   Bioinformatics, vol. 14, no. Suppl 19, p. S3, 2013.
